The volcano rabbit (Romerolagus diazi) (Spanish: conejo de los volcanes), also known as the teporingo or zacatuche, 
is a species of small rabbit that lives in pine and alder forests on volcanic slopes in Mexico. It is the only species 
in the genus Romerolagus and is considered to be the most primitive species among the rabbits and hares. It has small rounded ears, 
short legs, a large forehead, and short, thick fur. It is one of the world's smallest rabbits, lives in groups consisting of between 
two and five members, and makes burrows (underground nests) and runways (worn-down, frequently traveled surface paths) among bunchgrasses. Up to three young are produced per litter, 
born in nests formed from shallow depressions in the ground lined with fur and plant matter.

Uniquely among the rabbits, the volcano rabbit emits high-pitched sounds to warn other rabbits of danger, a habit common in the related pikas.
 It is awake and most active in the evening and early morning. Populations have been estimated as approximately 7,000 adult individuals over their 
 entire range. Human developments surrounding the volcano rabbit's habitat—including overgrazing, hunting, and burning of the species' preferred scrublands—have 
 caused significant declines in population, even in protected parks. Both the IUCN and the Mexican government consider the volcano rabbit an endangered species, and it is 
 listed on Appendix I of the CITES treaty, which is intended to restrict trade of the animal.

Taxonomy and etymology
Romerolagus diazi was first described by the head of the Mexican Geographical and Exploring Commission, Fernando Ferrari-Pérez, in 1893 as a member of the hares (genus Lepus), using the scientific name Lepus diazi and common name conejo del Volcán (volcano rabbit).[4] The species name diazi honors the Mexican cartographer[5] Agustín Díaz, who published the work where the species was first described.[6] The type specimen was collected on the northeastern slopes of Ixtaccíhuatl, a volcano near San Martín Texmelucan, in the Mexican state of Puebla.[7][8] It

cat data.txt
grep "rabbit" data.txt
wc -l
