In the evening hours of Friday, May 4, 2007, amid a severe weather outbreak across the central United States, a devastating tornado moved through Kiowa County, Kansas, heavily damaging the town of Greensburg. The tornado, known as the Greensburg tornado,[2][3] tracked 28.8 miles (46.3 km) through the area, killing 12 people and injuring 63. The tornado was the first to be rated EF5 on the Enhanced Fujita scale after the retirement of the original Fujita scale in the United States on February 1, 2007.

The tornado touched down south of Greensburg at around 9:03 p.m. CDT,[note 1] moving to the north while continuing to widen. It eventually entered Kiowa County, crossing U.S. Route 183, before reaching a peak width of 1.7 miles (2.7 km) to the south of Greensburg, entering the city after making a northwest turn. The tornado heavily damaged Greensburg; 662 structures in the town sustained some form of damage. The tornado dissipated northwest of Greensburg after being on the ground for just over an hour.

95% of the town was damaged or destroyed and the tornado left monetary losses of $250 million (2007 USD)[note 2] in its wake. Kiowa County, in which Greensburg is located, was declared a federal disaster area in the immediate aftermath. Rebuilding efforts were intensive, and several major federal government agencies collaborated with state agencies to help restore the town with the goal of making it a "green town" using a long-term community recovery (LTCR) plan. The plan included requiring all buildings in Greensburg to gain Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Platinum (LEED platinum) certification, the highest rating a building can achieve in the LEED program by utilizing sustainable design in energy,[4][5] along with installing wind turbines in the city. The Kiowa County Memorial Hospital, which was destroyed by the tornado, was the first hospital in the United States to achieve carbon neutrality following its rebuilding in 2010.

The tornado greatly affected the economy and population of Greensburg. The town has difficulty attracting residents due to the cost of homes in the area, although it has become a point of interest among eco-tourists visiting to see the "green town" built by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's LTCR plan.

Climatological background
Tornadoes are common in the state of Kansas, with an average of 87 tornadoes touching down per year. Kansas sees the second-highest number of tornadoes within its state-boundaries in an average year, behind only Texas, which sees 124 on average.[6] Kansas is located in the center of Tornado Alley,[7] the region of the United States in which the most tornadoes occur.[8] Cold and dry air from the Rocky Mountains and the West Coast of the United States drops into Tornado Alley, while moist subtropical air is pulled inward from the Gulf of Mexico. The cold air pushes under the warm and moist air, pushing it upward;[9] this updraft leads to the development of thunderstorms capable of producing strong tornadoes.[10]

Kansas has experienced seven F5 or EF5 tornadoes since 1950, the highest number recorded in any U.S. state. Research conducted by meteorologist and tornado historian Thomas P. Grazulis concluded that F5-rated tornadoes have struck Kansas since 1895.[7] Kansas has an estimated 4.4 tornadoes per 100 square miles (260 km2), the third-highest frequency in the nation, after Oklahoma and Florida.[11]

Meteorological synopsis